Well, um, it's a pleasure to be here.
Um, I have the role of being the chair of the,
the committee, uh, today.
And, uh, we have a very clear purpose, as was, uh,
articulated by, uh, my, uh, good colleague here, Adrian.
And I'll sort of repeat some of it in, in, uh, in English so
that everybody is clear with what we had,
because we wanna make sure that this is an effective meeting
and it's, uh, efficient and
and proper for the purpose that we're trying to serve
as the, the committee, the, uh, the Maori Affairs Committee.
So, uh, for those that aren't aware, the process of, uh,
passing a bill through parliament, it starts
with a first reading where we have speeches there,
and then it gets allocated to our committee here
to run this process here, which is a big part of it,
which is, uh, opening up submissions.
We've received over 200 submissions, uh, to the bill.
And, uh, there's a number of people that wish to be heard,
and today is one of those opportunities,
and it's just a pleasure for us to be here on your UA coming
to your place and to be able to be, uh, with regards
to these submissions itself.
So thank you for the invitation
and for the hospitality that you provided thus far.
Um, so yeah, the purpose here is obviously the, uh, Nazi
claim settlement bill.
And, uh, this can include expressing support, uh,
for or disagreement with the contents within the bill.
But as Adrian, uh, mentioned in, uh, in Del was,
the fact is we are very confined as, uh, we want
to talk about the bill.
And, uh, it's not unusual for, uh, our settlement processes
and submissions for there to be some, uh, other aspects,
some, some, some other things like that there.
But I need to tell you that we are clearly
focusing on the content of the bill
and how you can contribute, uh, your conversation to us
to make sure that that bill is as fit
for purposes we could possibly make it.
That's our purpose here today.
So, um, with regards to personal criticisms
or anything like that, as we say in the, in the rugby terms,
playing, playing the, uh, playing the, uh, the ball,
not the man, so to speak, we, we want
to keep it focused there.
And one of my roles as chair, if I feel that we're starting
to perhaps, uh, move away from that,
I'll be pulling it back into line.
So that's, uh, a little bit of a heads up with that.
Let's make this a constructive conversation.
We've already read the submissions.
Thank you very much for all those that have, uh,
put pen to paper thus far.
And now we're going hear the, the cordial for those that,
that, that wish to, to speak to us, uh, about it itself.
And we look forward to this interaction,
and we wanted to make it a conversation.
Please relax. Uh, the, the best way
to communicate is when we're all relaxed.
So don't, don't be, be, uh, too, uh, too tight and,
and too nervous about this.
Just say it how it doesn't all work. Well.
So, just a little bit about this hearing.
Um, so the, this hearing is actually, uh, being recorded
and it's been live streamed.
So all of the, the business that we conduct
as a committee is public, uh,
unless there's a very good reason why it's not So, uh,
this one here is absolutely public
and will be live streamed.
Um, and the hearing is obviously open to the public.
So quite literally, uh, any member of the public is,
has the right to be able to be here as well to listen.
Um, the committee staff, as Adrian also mentioned,
we've got, uh, a lot of staff here.
We have a lot of support, our committee,
but we've got people from the Clark's office,
but also from, um, uh, as well from Mr.
Office. So we've got great support for us today.
We've also got a couple of security guards here.
Now, that's not unusual. Every, every one of our procedures,
that's actually part of the, the parliamentary rules is that
to keep everybody safe, including ourselves, is
that we have a, a a couple of security staff
and thank you very much, uh,
for your help for today as well.
So, about the process here, as I said, we,
we've received 200, um, over 200 submissions as a bit
of a convention for an individual.
We, we provide approximately five minutes to an individual
and 10 minutes, uh, to an, an, uh, a group itself.
Um, a little bit of flex.
I'm not gonna be too rigid on that,
but we do need to get through our business.
So I'll be trying to keep some form of timeframe, uh,
with regards to that.
Um, and is there anything else? Oh, housekeeping.
I talk about the housekeeping.
Can anybody help everybody know where the toilets are
and we done back?
Yeah, and I dunno whether you have big earthquakes
or anything, but I'm sure there's
a place that we can all go to.
I'll be the first one out here today, okay.
Out outside over here if there's anything there for,
for any evacuation, uh, reason or anything like that.
But other than that, um, I think we're ready
to, uh, to get into it.
Now, the other thing that's a bit of a convention is that
with the hearings we usually provide, uh,
the negotiating team, or,
or should I say the, the, the trust in this instance
to have the first court at all.
Then we'll have the submissions,
and then there's a right, uh,
of reply at the end of it as well.
So, Dan, uh, you'll get, uh, two shots at the,
uh, you the opportunity.
But, uh, the, as appropriate, the very first, uh,
conversation we'll have is with the trust coming.
So Dan, we've got approximately, you know, 10 minutes, uh,
view as the opening comments,
and you've done a huge amount of work on this.
Uh, we'll, we'll go, we'll look at the time as we go.
So, Dan, the floor's, yours, Kiara,
Kiara to, um, again, welcome to, um,
and, um, in our beautiful, um, train station here that, um,
we use our Iwi offices and, um, C River
and all sorts of bits and pieces in, in, in here.
Um, about me, I, yeah, I'm a small business owner, um,
heavily involved with my rugby club still.
I'm among the community, my rugby club, um,
and obviously on, on this here.
Um, but Norm said, um, former Black and, um,
and former Maori bla,
and the, the chair of our, of our PSG, um,
I have the authority to speak here as, um, as the URI of,
of Ter, um, was from Awa,
um, on, on, on the a
and the man has been with him ever since.
Um,
who we understand was was born as ha.
Um, from there, um, um, married George Lipsey,
the Irishman from there, um, George Lipsey Jr.
Um, Francis, my, uh, Robert Craig, Scott,
my mother, Susan, me,
and I've got, two of my kids are outside as well.
There's another line that comes down, um,
after Al, which is Pat, uh, and Tu
and two Q's children were ho and was mocking his mother.
Um, ho was the, the supreme chief of, um, around the signing
of Thet wa And,
and through the, through the Musket wars, um, uh, Una's,
um, mother and maternal grandfather were, were killed
and was taken in by ho, um, and was under his protection.
And that's why Tim moa, um, takes the name, um,
ho Tim Ho Tim was also, um, baptized, um,
in pdi, um, in the, in the 1830s, um,
through, through there.
So yeah, that, that, that's, um, that's my,
and you know, we really hold very strongly
to our descent from, and Mana has been, um,
unchallenged on the aha, um, since his time there
through there, um, up to our PSG
and the process to us, to us, um, getting here, obviously,
um, our pre-negotiated were mandated in 2011.
And a, um, and a, um, negotiator, um,
committee was formed, um, negotiations
that we were ratified in 2017, initialed, um,
all signed off by the ministers.
Um, after which, um,
that time we transferred from the settlements committee
into, um, operating our post settlement governance entity.
And the deed that, um, that operates under, um,
around that 2017 fund that we initialed.
Um, we'd all be well aware
that we got stuck in cross claims issues with and, um,
and, and several other issues.
Mm-hmm. Um, and so we have sort of been, we've been a PSG,
um, operating pre-settlement slightly in, in, in limbo, um,
severely prejudiced by this.
Um, but we could not,
and we would not wait, um, for, for settlement to come
through before we, um, got in and,
and started operating, um, with the amount of, um,
activity going on in from governments with other and,
and locally, we, um, yeah, unapologetically, um, have, um,
been been operating and,
and done, um, a lot of amazing things we, we, um,
setting ourselves up.
Um, or when, um, when settlement comes through.
Um, you know, we, we, we've, as a trust,
we have set our long term targets
and our strategic gains, um, cultural enhancement.
Um, you know, we set up in here, we do, um, weaving ang, um,
to, um, we look after our ua.
Um, we set up a, um,
where we were on the Moga getting rid of, um, weeds.
We've got a part of a Kodi, um, looking after Cody.
So, um, many things across to, to look after our ua.
Um, add to that, um, the environmental Tonga, again, the
partnership with councils.
Um, we have been working in, um, with local businesses to,
to protect our ua, um, and look
after everything, um, a big part of what we're doing, our,
our aims for our commercial enterprises, um,
building our asset base, um, to fund the bits
and pieces that we need to do to operate so
that we can do all these other cultural, environmental, uh,
things, um, looking after the health of our people.
And here we run a, um, a,
uh, a free clinic.
We have built a relationship, um, with one of the local gps.
So Friday morning we, we run a free GP clinic in here
where any anyone can turn up in the whole community, um,
through their, um, also social and, and educational.
Um, we have, um, we've set up, we,
we've taken alternative education.
We've built a, an amazing relationship with the,
with the local, um, secondary school, as well as, um,
as well as the, the primary schools.
But we have an alternative education.
We've used a space, um, to, to look
after, um, those kids, uh,
and, um, also an bring employment, um, to, to people
and to people in here.
Um, so what I'm talking
to here is on behalf of the trust, is focusing on the future
and the potential and what we can do going forward, um,
on behalf of the trust.
Um, I say that we fully endorse and,
and support, um, our, our settlement going through.
Um, and this will help us achieve all of our aspirations.
Um, we've already done so much with, you know,
with limited funds, with uncertainty
around where we were heading.
Um, our decision to even sign, we're still up in the air.
It's been a pragmatic choice considering everything
that's gone on, but we, um, we realize that, um, in this day
and age, um, you need to have, um, people funded
and people when they're working for you
and pushing for you, um, and, and,
and speaking on your behalf.
Um, so from, from here, um,
I see our, our future is, is incredibly bright.
Um, what we could potentially achieve with full asset, uh,
full access to our, to our settlement, to our funds,
full recognition of our man on the aha.
Um, it,
it will go towards benefiting all our people from our UA
to all the way down.
It will benefit our, our,
and it will benefit everyone, um, in, in our community.
So again, um, on behalf of the, the Naati Trust, um, ID
and support, um, the,
and all of its contents for the ki thank you.
Thank you, Ru, uh, any, uh,
points of clarity from members?
Yes. Uh, Dan,
I just wanted to, um, if you could talk
to us a little bit about the amount of,
and the type of consultation that, um, you've had to go
through to get to this point.
Um, from, I've been on the, the committee from, um,
the chair since, um, 2020.
And, um, so all the consultation
and all the, the mandate, everything that came through 2011
through till through till 2017, it was all done
and signed off by the ministers.
And so that's what we, we,
we take our mandate from, um, through there.
So, uh, how do you keep that, um,
that mandate warm? So you,
That warm, uh, through, through our,
through acting our activity, um, live in, we, um, um,
you know, we are on regular updates on, on our social media
and putting things out, putting things out there,
um, through, through that.
Yes.
Any other points? Yeah, Steve? Yeah, I, I just
Wanted to ask you, thank you very much, Dan, for your, um,
summary of things in your written submission.
You talk about the naming, um, that have expressed, uh,
my mind that this name doesn't, um, reflect their truth, aka
Um, the inclusion of Link US
to 2.0 is not from their ancestral line.
And then you go on to say, at the same time, others identify
with, uh, have felt hurt
that our PSG carries the name trust.
Um, but both corridor are real,
both contain Whakapapa history and ua.
Both experiences deserve respect.
Wonder if you can expand on that a little for us.
Yes, it is. Um, yeah.
Um, a very deep
and probably need longer than 10 minutes to fully discuss.
But, um, so in, in this portion as my, as my, in my role
and what I'm um, doing here is as, as the chair of the PSGI,
um, need to remain neutral.
And so those comments there were acknowledging, um,
people's comments, um, a a around that,
that some don't feel like they f**k up other people
as the has has the, has the connection there.
And, um, so we, we, we acknowledge that,
that the story is true
and deep around y um, Ari going back into,
into the native land court, um, hearings in, in the 1870s.
Um, and again,
and with my hat on that I've got here as the chair
of this trust, I will, I can only give the, the background
and the story, and I, and I'll give my personal opinion
and my, and my personal, um, testimony.
But in, in my role here, I acknowledge that there is, um,
that there, um, is concern from, from different members of,
of, of our iwi and,
and different hapu in there, um, around, around the naming.
Um, though we will give the background, um, in there
that there is, you know, it, it was a compromise to get to
Namu, um, through there by the, by the settlements, um,
the settlement committee, um,
before my time, um, uh,
on, on, on the trust.
But, um, I will let, um, individuals bring up
that COPA and, and deal with that Copa and then,
or any further clarification will be, um,
at the end of the testimony.
I appreciate that.
Any, uh, other points? Yes.
No, thank you very much, Stan,
and we'll be, uh, catching you.
So thank you very much. Okay.
Uh, next up we have a submission from, uh, June McCaskill.
Okay. Yeah.
We'll have bring June to the, to the front,
because it's recorded.
We need all the submitters to be
by the mic at the front end.
Got it. June. Alright. Thank you.
You can be seated or whatever you
want, whatever you're comfortable doing.
Uh, thank you very much for your submission
and like I said, we've had a, an opportunity to, to read it.
So now's your time to,
to highlight the parts that you wish to hold.
So that way you go,
Uh, RA, my name is,
I am literally Ika at the Marai.
So I come from a perspective of whanau
that live here, come back here.
Um, I will, what I,
uh,
I stand here before you today with deep humility,
carrying the voices of my parents, my cousins, my aunties
and uncles, and all those who have shaped my journey
that brings us growing up at the par is my wife.
Growing up here at the par meant different for each of us.
For me, being a marae baby was not just a place,
but about the people.
Before the Mara was erected beside our home,
there were homesteads, two homesteads of two sisters
who created that path, who helped us navigate
what we were supposed to do as those houses where
a place where cousins, nannies and aunties
and uncles supported one another.
It was there where we learned kaka built sports teams,
celebrated our joys and mourned our losses.
The invisible fence line between two sisters
that never a barrier
because of the strength
of the wau was greater than any boundaries.
This was a found foundation of our why and my why,
but this is then my why.
Too often those two call themselves whanau, who sit
around tables speaking only to each other about trials
and tribulations, the wins, the glories,
and the moving forward wins
and losses are shared amongst only themselves
or within those circles.
Yet we as whanau, hapu iwi should be privy
to those journeys, the victories and the setbacks alike.
Because what affects us affects us all.
My why is to break open those circles to ensure that
struggles and triumphs are all shared within us.
Our papa struggles.
In the past two years, some of our final have been forced.
The final alternative accommodation members
that brought Wau papa, not only because they wanted to, but
because they could not to have a wau, could not afford
to carry the debt left behind.
This is not a financial burden,
it was a spiritual and emotional one.
There were Wau who had always to talk with the whose hands
and hearts where, where wherever help was needed was there.
And yet they too were made to struggle, to sacrifice,
to carry the weight of decisions
that have been shared more openly with us all.
Yet, the land sits empty.
No home, no han on
for my sister sacrifice, my sister, who, me, our cousins,
and even the iwi trust.
When we returned, she was the one who called, who led us
to Kaia, who set up
and gathered Kai, who built memories for us all.
And yet she is suffering the
most her.
That was shown. She was, it was all in vain.
She was left to find emergency housing
again while members were able to purchase homesteads,
that at the time the Iwi trust houses were available.
But in no way, shape, or form did they offer to help.
Emergency housing for our wau is not acceptable.
When the iwi could have
provided service to help, that was not the
Copa we meant to stand for.
Who are these people and
who are they supposed to be navigating?
Are they supposed to navigate our iwi into something greater
when the message they send is so clear?
Messages of exclusion, pressure of disregard
for the very whanau that hold this place together.
We are still struggling with so much in this town,
and yet the things that are offered do not truly benefit the
whanau who desperately need them.
A marai has been called the bane of existence, labeled as
to toxic by the same people who now host the Hui.
Right here at this place of significance, is it
that contradiction cuts deep
because us the marai is nott toxic.
It's the heartbeat of our whanau, the place
where our stories live, where our tears have fallen.
And where our laughter has echoed to di dismiss it is
to dismiss the generations we have built
and carried it who have kept us alive.
And yet, despite those words, the rai still stance.
It still welcomes, it still holds us together.
That is the strength of our people to enjoy criticism,
enjoy hardship, and to continue to rise between the Mara.
Because the Mara is more than just the building.
It's us rekindling the
fire of why I'm here.
Why I moved back. My cousin had reached out with an idea
and it was a beautiful idea,
and it still is to light the fires
that were desperately needed for our wwi.
Our, it was a dream to create mahi
to strengthen the collective purpose
and to remind us of who we actually are.
I moved here with my whanau
and to put those cord into action, to together,
we built nurseries, extending knowledge to whanau
who became ka mahi in a fund project.
This was not about plants
or buildings, it was about planting a seed hope, resilience,
and the identity, or the Mona has always stood
as a guardian watching over us.
The restoration eradication work we undertook was seen
by some as impossible.
But we know as our tu knew that nothing is impossible.
When we au stand together for the Mona by the Mona,
we prove that challenges can overcome.
Every step we took was a reminder
that our strength lies not in individuals,
but a collective heartbeat of iwi and a he body.
And yet, as we stand here today,
there has been no open a GM, no hui publicly or courted
or shared on, on social media.
Decisions have been made behind closed doors.
And I cannot stand by quietly.
I'm opposing that the settlement is currently as it stands
because before any settlement comes through, we as an iwi,
hapu, and whanau should be ready, already be flourishing.
Before this money even came through,
we should already see the fruits of our mahi, the strength
of our unity and transparency of our leadership.
I should not be standing here opposing to this happening,
but I am and I do because my wife is clear.
Our whanau, our hapu, our iwi, and our deserve better.
We deserve honesty, inclusion in the future,
built together, not a part.
And you, I just,
Yeah. And that's it. And
at the end of it, I am,
I stand here today of the y this settlement
of our y the trust of the whanau.
Our journey is not about history, but about the future.
We are building for our, we are here
because our ancestors dreamed of us to be here
because our w fought for us.
And we are here because we choose to carry on the fire for
Steve. Oh, sorry. So
You want me to say, Steve,
We, uh, we find ourselves often in this
very challenging situation.
'cause we kind of had a, have a binary choice.
We either voted, voted against the bill entirely,
or we vote for it entirely.
I wonder what your, um,
worst fears are if the bill gets put through,
because that's the way we would usually go based on
it, be being signed.
My my fear is that your
decision making is what happens to be for us right now.
We, it's ta
and I'm not not acknowledging the mahi that's gone through
before this has happened.
But the fact is that why are we segregated?
Because we do not understand sometimes whanau, uh, trying
to figure out how this works.
How the iwi trust works, where our money's going to.
Is it actually gonna benefit us?
Shouldn't we already be flourishing?
As I said in my corridor way
before the settlement money came in, only a portion
of people are, uh, okay, in this situation, having mahi,
we had, uh, six Kai Mahi on the ground doing the mahi,
but yet we still only have two.
We have people here, we have whanau here that need mahi.
That's, that was the reason why I come home,
because it was a dream
and a purpose of making sure that my wau, my Uri,
we are gonna enrich in this purpose.
We were gonna build a bigger iwi hapu uri.
That's how was gonna work.
The dream that I had seen had diminished
because I am not here anymore,
but I still live next door to the, I still see the nursery
that is being built by my own hands, by W's hands.
We are suffering. And what I see is that the,
whether we get this money
or not, I want to see that we are enriched by the people
that are in these seats that talk for us,
that talk to you guys.
I want to see that. I want to be more engaged
and having a say and not having other five people have a
say, be part of the cloth that is being made right now.
Because at the moment,
it's just a tablecloth sitting on a table
that we don't know even know who they are.
And that's sad. We should know who they are first
and foremost all the time.
We should be in their ear being pains in their
backside, whatever.
That's what we are. That's what we are here for.
So then we have a voice
and they speak for us, not speaking for a term that is gonna
one day in the future be for them.
It's for our kids and for our wau.
Okay. Any last, um,
I've been the chair of a iwi going through a settlement.
One of the biggest issues that you deal with is
managing people's expectations.
Mm. Before a settlement.
Much harder than after a settlement. Yeah.
Just making a point. Yeah.
Um, so, uh, I'm just wondering if you've considered,
um, if you are upset
with the right party to this.
'cause it was the crown that did all of those things. Yeah.
It wasn't that did,
did it to themselves.
This a fact. Yeah. The crown did that.
What we will say to you that, um, when we get, um,
'cause we get the, the officials in front of us
after we've heard all the evidence,
and we'll be asking some tough questions based on
what you have told us, and we're gonna exclude those
to be checked out and whether they hold water or not.
Um, so I understand Ben,
be very sure about that.
Yeah. I I just wanna ask one question.
Did you participate in the ramification
of the deed of settlement?
When I came in, in the two years when I was working here,
I was part of, um, going with my cousin, um, in
that part of listening and hearing.
And that was, I suppose,
a conversation when you are younger doesn't
mean anything right.
Until you come back and then it means something.
Um, but that was the point, even if I left,
or even if whanau haven't been there,
should they not still participate in
informing what's going on?
So then we are not sitting here unknowing
or we should be knowing so we,
we can then fight against the crown
of what's been gone wrong, what's gone wrong.
But we don't, not all of us know. And I
Can't answer my question, did you participate in it?
Because we've been told
that it was monitored throughout the whole process by,
um, and the information that we've got is
that it met all of the expectations of the,
of the crown in determining
that the settlement has been,
I wasn't part of that and it's, but I'm still part of
Yeah, correct.
Um, thank you very, oh, so sorry,
I have a question. Absolutely. Go.
Thank you, Lisa. Mission.
Um, my question is, uh, well probably first a reflection,
but in some of the other treaty settlement processes
that we've sat through and we've listened to, um,
it's been their second time around
and they have lost their first attempt at a settlement,
and it's sometimes taken them up to 20 years
to get back at the table.
And so my question to you is, is that a suitable outcome
or is, uh, the, uh, uh, uh, dealing with the settlement now,
um, a catalyst for an opportunity that may be lost?
If it's not settled now?
I think, and I,
and it has, it's taken a long time to get to where we are,
and it's honestly, I think it's not enough for
what is deserved.
You know, um, and I don't wanna put any setbacks to it,
but I just do want to put my point across is that for us,
we need to make sure that we are all privy to this
because the questions
that are being asked right now in front
of you should be questions that we were already asking
to our panel that sit here who are fighting the fight.
And I suppose it's, uh, the hardest part is
to sit here and answer these questions
because I've only just come in
and hoping that what we have to say as whanau
come through and to, to, to making sure that this is
heard, I suppose. Yeah.
I don't have a question, but just as close
as I do have a comment, is that my observations of
these opportunities where our select committee allows
for open communication from all sorts of parties, uh,
there's a lot of people in the room here that are listening
to your conversation, and I'm sure you'll be respectful
and listening to the, uh, the other side of the story
as well, but that's actually helpful as well.
Okay. A lot of this is about communication. Yeah.
Ironically, we're almost a conduit for you to be talking
to your people as well as talking to us.
So, so a June, thank you very much for the, uh, submission
that you provided today, and
Thank you. Thank you.
Okay. Next up we have, uh, Frank ura.
Hmm.
Frank, you've been sitting in the,
in the back room there, so you know the drill.
We'll get about approximately five minutes to,
uh, hear from you.
Uh, we've had the opportunity to read your submission,
but you use this time the way you, way you felt.
You, my name is, uh, Frankie.
I'm a, um, descendant of, uh, here as well as, uh,
as, uh, over in as well as, uh, as,
um, down the coast.
Born in, down the coast, down little place called, oh,
yes, sorry.
Moved up here when I was, um, two.
And I've been a part of the ti all those years.
But my nanny, my nanny is a, um,
a McCaskill same as June.
And all my, the June's, uh, grandmothers
and aunties and uncles are all my nanny's sisters.
So I have a lot.
And the other side of my, uh, is my, who
my auntie and cousin got killed in the floods,
came down from the mountain, took their house away.
So I sit here on, on behalf of them and,
and all my w down too far.
My, um, my is about, about
and being brought up here.
And at the age of, uh, we, we,
we spent a lot of time down ppo.
The only, the only way we knew how to back then to fundraise
for money was to play cards and drink alcohol.
And for many years that happened, but we didn't.
We, we, we got up, but that's about all we got up.
So, and,
and when I turned eight, I mean,
so I wasn't a bad child, but the government,
because of what happened to my parents and all the fighting
and the, and my mother in the hospital, I, I end up in
as a part, part of, uh, the state of what they call state
of the ward, ward the state.
So I spent a lot of, at the age of seven, going, going to a,
um, going to well, more,
less work on a farm that I didn't know the people.
But I look back on it, I ducked on it years ago,
and I'm thinking, well, that was just a form
of slavery way back.
But they kept on moving me around.
If I didn't like it there, they'd take me to another farm
and let me be brought up by then.
In the end, I got sent down to a boys' home down in, um,
not a boys' home, a um, a a young,
young juvenile detention center down LA where, where they,
where they held me for two years.
And I still don't, don't know until this day
while I was locked up, why I was there when I stood in.
But I then I'll cut the story short, then I come back here,
and then I realized that, um, was just like,
and the, the,
the discrimination towards Maori way back then,
back in the fifties and the sixties, it was horrible.
It was horrible getting thrown, rock thrown at you
because you were Maori.
And if you didn't live the life, you wouldn't know,
because I had my cousins up the hill
and we used to fight, fight all, all, everybody out,
but it was horrible.
But, so we used to go down to the ma,
we felt safe down there.
We, we were, all my nans were all down there with my aunties
and uncles, and all my cousins are down.
So we spent a lot of time down at tpa.
We used to call it tpa.
Not, not, not, not, not what they call it now.
There were tpa. It was always tpa.
And we used to go down there on the Friday
and go home on the Sunday night.
And that, that was twi pa as we knew it, it,
it was a horrible, but yeah.
And then I, I went into the army
and then I come outta the army,
and I, it wasn't much different from boys homes.
Uh, you know, like I, I spent six years in the army
and it, it was, you know, people, well, why?
I said, well, it wasn't much different from a boy's home.
Or you make your bed, you go and have something to eat,
and then you go out and try and learn how to kill somebody
because it's too bad.
So a as I grew up, and, and the alcohol got the best of me.
It truly then, and I,
and I was a, I was the functioning alcoholic,
and I gave it away in 1985
and April this year I celebrated my 40th birthday.
And it's been hard
and for me to live through it all again
prior, prior to, with my cousins
and my wife tried to, to, to, to understand
the, the what, what's happening here.
And because I, I, I sit on the, uh, I sit on the,
the committee over, over in Ang.
I, I sit on the land land committee down down the coast,
and I have no problems.
I come here to tell her, being,
being the trustee, I've gotta fight.
I've gotta fight for a anything,
and I'm gotta fight for my lawn mower.
I've gotta use my lawn mower for two
and a half years until it breaks down.
I think you need to buy a lawn mower.
So we have to, uh, go to the, the, the, uh,
the, to the Lando.
Just ask for a lawnmower, because why one breaks down
and the lawn mowers don't need to mow the part
because Mark takes care of the mud.
It's, it is a constant battle over and over again.
But, but back to the, um,
it's, it's, I I have no pro, I, it's too late to,
to, to put a submission to towards about
what we're gonna get and how much we're gonna get
and what are we gonna get.
My, my, my,
if we do get, when we do get it back, who's, who's gonna,
who's gonna look after it.
'cause the way it stands now, yeah, the, the people
that are trying to look, that think
they're going to get, get it.
Yeah. Yeah. They're not the right people.
Believe you and me, because you've been fighting with them
for, since I've been back from Australia,
and I've been back six years now,
and I've been fighting ever since.
The everything we need to do down, if you, if you,
if you've got nothing to do afterwards, go, go down
and have a look at our, my life
and see how it's fallen down.
It is falling down.
It, it's, it's gonna lead
and need a lot of money to bring it back up, down.
It is, got no insurance on it.
We don't let people use it
because we have no insurance on it.
We get burned down to get burned down tomorrow.
So there's nothing we can do about,
because we have no money.
We have money now that land owners have money.
So that was one of my, that was one of my, when,
when I got onto the, um, when, when I put my name down
to be on the, uh, part of the trustees, I said,
it is part of my submission.
I said, I only reason why I want
to get on this committee on board trustees is
to stop people ripping the mud off,
because it's been happening for years
and years and years and years.
And all that land money that the farmer pays,
it goes into our account.
Yeah. It's used, gets used by the ma
where it shouldn't be, it should be used,
but the, the landowner's money is the landowner's money.
And I told them that. I said, all I need,
all you need is one landowner to come
and ask them, where's our dividends for our land?
And you fells have to explain to them,
because I'm not gonna explain to them, Frank,
provide some concluding remarks or get into some questions.
Yeah. That all, all, all, all I, all I want to say is,
you know, to the right people to handle,
because we, we've done all right
because, you know, we, we, they, they had five years to,
to what's known to, to approach use about, we, we had,
we had two weeks to get out 200
and something, 200, whatever it was submission to we done,
you know, the fund had done really well
to do what they've done.
Yeah. So, yeah. That's about all I have to say.
Think
That's it. So
you would like to see an expectation
that it's clear in the settlement that the running of them
Modi is properly funded,
you're responsible for it.
Yeah. Yes, yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
But I, I, I don I who, whoever, whoever, what's her name?
We, we have a mi modai committee. We have a Modi Trust.
Yeah. If we, if they weren't capable
of being on in those positions, yeah.
We, we don't want somebody for the iwi telling us what to do
or how to, how to go about, we know how to fix it.
Yeah. Yeah. We just need, and we, we have none. Okay. Yeah.
Any last, uh, points? Cla Okay. I thank you very much.
Thank you. Thanks. Thank you. Thank you. Okay.
Um, landowners,
I'm
got names here of Nicole and Ike is that great.
Ike, um, wasn't here, but Frank's part, Mark's part June.
Awesome. And Tanya,
Good stuff. Just
great. So, so we,
we've got approximately 10 minutes. That's
Okay. We'll make it quick.
Good. As well. We just, I'm the wife of Frank, so,
Okay. Awesome. Um,
yeah. Okay. The floor's, yours, where you go.
Okay.
I'm glad I've written it. Okay. Um, Mr.
Chair, members of the select committee, um, we stand
before you today as a representative of a small group
of concern Wau, um, who've come together
to address just some issues, uh,
regarding the administration
and care of the land that we have on TPA Road.
Our journey began with a desire
to understand the processes affecting our land,
and to ensure that the interests of our whanau are protected
through the Namu settlement bill proceedings.
Although some aspects of alco may not directly relate
to the Bill's final stages, we feel it's crucial
to bring our concerns to your attention.
As AU members, we've taken on multiple roles to, um,
serve the collective best interests.
Prompted by disclosures that naati
to Tumu trust was making significant decisions
belonging to the collective.
Often without the adequate consultation
or respect for informal administrators, namely the TWE farm
trustees, our investigation revealed
that several traveling actions, including the proposal,
proposed cancellation of land leases for Papa kga,
the cancellation of blocks owned by multiple whanau members,
the redirection of leasing income to accounts controlled
by the trust and the purchase of a whanau property
that resulted in homelessness with no support offered.
These actions have raised significance, concerns
around transparency, consultation,
and the protection of our wau interests.
We followed proper channels seeking guidance from Maori land
courts, organizing hui
and dedicated considerable time for forming
and advocating for our whanau.
While many have expressed gratitude,
others remain deeply concerned
and angry about how these decisions were made,
especially when our land
and interest should have been safeguarded.
Despite face facing resistance
and attempts to silence our voices, we remain committed
to a peaceful advocacy, ensuring whanau have access
to information and the ability to make informed choices.
Our approach reflects the true spirit of consultation,
offering knowledge and updates to all,
regardless of their perspective.
We respectfully request that the Select Committee
and Crown consider these issues as part
of the settlement bill, ensuring
that a genuine consultation, transparency,
and protection of whanau interests are upheld.
Considering these experiences, we urge the crown
to pay careful attention to the underlying issues
of governance and representation
that affect not only our whanau, but the wider collective.
It's our sincere hope that the select committee will ensure
that all voices, especially those who have been marginalized
or excluded from any a given due consideration
in these final stages, our plea is not
to undermine the progress made,
but to reinforce the PRI principles of fairness,
transparency, and inclusion values we believe must underpin
any settlement process going forward. Na, Mihi?
Sure. Thank you very much. Okay.
Um, for questions you off again.
You go, you go. Um, thank you.
Um, I, I'm trying to understand
why people think they haven't been consulted with
when we've seen evidence, let's say consultation was held.
That's the first point.
Um, and I'm not being rude,
but you are not you, do you?
Um, well, I can't ask you that,
but, um, yeah, it is.
People had the opportunity
to participate in the ratification of the deed
of settlement, um, which outlines
everything that is in the, um,
that needs legislation to be passed forward.
Um, so that's our job today.
So why, why do you think,
why didn't people participate in that?
It was advertised? It was,
How was it advertised?
Because we all sit as Maori committee and trustees,
and we have not been informed at any stage.
We've been involved, and my mother-in-law was the only
information she was ever received was way back in 2017.
This, I'm not sure what evidence is
provided that informs that our whanau have had his voice.
We only have found out
that the apology was even accepted three weeks ago.
There is no communication.
There might be a slight post on Facebook,
but for many of our ua, they don't read.
There's no Hui, there's no AGMs.
We went to the Hoki Trust
and asked them, is there responsibility for them
to be able to invite?
So we're aware they told us, no, we have not had,
there might be evidence there,
but I'm not sure how, what the, how
that evidence has been compiled.
It's not relevant. Our wana wouldn't be
so upset if they'd had opportunity to engage.
And that's where we come from.
And maybe that's a question you're able to ask them
Officials, because, um, because
Provide us, and the,
and it'll be the same thing from our Maori committee.
We are dealing with the hurt and the MAI of our whanau
because it's like, where has this go?
You know, like it is, there's been no consultation.
We have two trustees on our MA committee
that have been privy to information
where everybody else is shut out.
That's, we are dealing with the hurt.
And probably just one comment I can make that, um,
Namu is not really responsible
for homelessness in our country.
The crown is, yeah, the crown is responsible.
Yeah. Could I just answer something on that?
Our problem is, is that Namu know that the Crown,
we have whanau that have engaged in really hard lives.
We have accommodation options.
Wouldn't our their responsibility be to our whanau first?
Yes. Yes. Wouldn't you think that you'd want the means
or NTU to be able to do that?
If they don't look after them? Now
You can, can't say that and say,
but I don't want them to have a settlement either
to have the resources to be able to do
what I'm saying they're not doing.
Maybe it's about the people in that settlement. It's
Not the settlement, it's the people. It,
It, it really is about the people.
We don't know who Daniel breed is.
We don't know who these guys are. We don't know.
We don't know who our, the nmu trustees are. We don't know.
They've never been down the Moro.
I've been in the family now for 30 years,
not coming up 30 years, and I've never met these guys.
I've met them time to time just here,
but never at the Maori.
And I live beside the Maori, and I'm all
I can, these people Are two ways through.
Okay. Any last points from members?
Just, just, my point would be
that I think you've made your perspective on us clear to us.
Yeah. We, we will definitely be asking some questions, but
That's all we ask.
That's all we ask. We can't,
and it's not about stopping progress, it's just an awareness
that we are representing whanau that we are talking
to all the time.
Yeah. Yep. Good point, Steven. Thank you.
Hey, thank you very much for this.
I think, am I next as well for the MAD committee?
Uh, we have committee. We certainly do.
Well, we all have several roles
because there's a, a small group of us
that carry quite a few hats and just trying to rebuild.
Um, as Frank had mentioned, for many of us have come back
to try and just regenerate.
And it was really effective
after COVID-19 where we saw so many
of our wau were disconnected.
Yep. We have a lot of our whanau that are struggling,
and we wanted our madai to be a pivotal point
where whanau could feel safe and reconnect.
Mm. Okay. So again, there's a small group.
There are others. Um, there are a couple
of our Modi committee that, um, unable to be here,
which they send their apologies.
So we first off want to acknowledge the extensive dedication
and commitment demonstrated to the negotiators
of many years, including our late queer Mark and Turner.
Their work in understanding redress,
establishing a trust in navigating the complexities
of documentation and legislation has led us
to this significant juncture.
We recognize that the considerable efforts were made in
to an advance to this process.
Um, not withstanding the above,
we respectfully just raised the concerns
regarding the limited opportunities for engagement
that have been afforded to our whanau committee
and those throughout this whole process.
The process in its current form has not enabled meaningful
participation from all stakeholders, which is, is
of a profound historical, cultural
and emotional significance to our people both past
and present, as well as our future generations.
Turning to the content of the bill, we acknowledge
that it appropriately commenced with an apology
and a critical, um, foundational step.
On the 26th of September, 2025 by Minister Kapo Goldsmith,
it acknowledged wrongdoing, recognition of harm,
the expression of for, and the commitment to reconciliation.
We respectfully submit that, given the magnitude
of this apology, shouldn't it have been shared directly
with every descendant of nhi?
So they all may be a witness to that.
Such a significant event.
Its important to note that many
of our Wau members present today have carried the trauma
of historical crown actions, such
as institutional office care
and the practice of pepper potting,
which have disrupted the connection to our madai community.
A privilege that many have been denied
for these individuals, spaces
for genuine apology should have been created.
And as an apology delivered solely in written form can only
feel devoured of empathy
and acknowledgement of our,
that our whanau rightly deserved.
The manner in which the information
regarding the apology was disseminated has
caused further distress.
Many whanau found out inadvertently,
rather than a formal invitation, emphasizing a lack
of regard shown by those
responsible for the redress process.
Our madai committee and all
but two madai trustees were excluded compounding the sense
of hurt and disappointment.
Disappointment. Further, we question why individuals
with minimal or no engagement with our marai, a position
to represent healing.
When longstanding members feel sideline, we ask,
who is the apology actually for?
Is it not intended to initiate genuine reconciliation
and acknowledge past wrongs?
Our second substantial point just
concerns the redress itself.
For many, the financial outcome is secondary
to the overarching concern that the current leadership, um,
do not sufficiently demonstrate care
for our whanau raising concerns about stewardship going
forward, repeated attempts to engage have met with barriers,
resistance, and at time hostility.
The madai environment has become fraught with some
of our wau reluctant to actually return due to fears
of aggression, exclusion, and disregard for their voices.
The madai, which should honor our elders,
is now an unsafe place for many.
Their manner is diminished
by those seeking power rather than community wellbeing.
Our community and madai deserve better.
And while the process may seem irreversible at this stage,
it's imperative to acknowledge
that our whanau have not had an adequate voice.
Many harbor concerns
and fears that future leadership will continue
to make decisions without genuine consideration
for all generations.
And we wish to affirm that regardless of differing opinions
or whakapapa, we will remain united as whanau.
We just respect, respectfully ask that the implementation
of the settlement bill is under pinned
by inclusive engagement and transparent leadership.
And all that voices, especially those of our elders
and traditionally underrepresented members, are heard
and respected in the future.
Thank you. Thank you. Uh, Nicole.
Um, other questions for Nicole?
Very, very clear. Yeah, I think it as much,
we've got some questions
obviously that we wish to take away.
Yeah. Okay. Okay. Thank you very much. Kilda
two breaks then, is that
Jill? Now is
if you wanna take a
Hear. Okay. So we can
move from Joel straight
to then we can just keep moving on.
Okay. So next, uh, Joel. Joel Taylor. Yeah,
Taylor.
Uh, we appear before you today as the co negotiators for
a role I have personally carried since 2011.
And Nick came on board
after being, uh, replacing our auntie, um,
the interim negotiator Mark Turner
and Nikki was voted in in 2012.
So we thank you for the opportunity to speak
and we will take our submission as read.
Um, just wanted to add a bit more to the court, um,
since we, we have this time.
But for more than a decade, we have carried this Copa on
behalf of our iwi, not as individuals,
but as mandated representatives.
Um, and we were asked to step forward by our people
through a robust mandating process.
That settlement journey has been long, difficult,
and at sometimes at times, deeply isolating.
That has required us to navigate crown systems
that were never designed with Te, Kama, Papa, Papa
or Iwi realities at the center.
There were moments when the process fractured our trust
so severely that we walked away from negotiations.
Yet we returned not because the system became easier,
but because our people deserved an outcome.
This bill represents the closing of
that painful chapter in our history
and the beginning of a new era,
we want to briefly address the issue that sits at behalf
of much of our corridor that you have received our iwi name.
Traditionally Througha, we were na.
And through the Native Land Court act and process
and the deed that was finally settled,
our iwi was represented as ri.
That's not te that would not happen.
But our is clear
and the evidence in the cases is clear.
But because the was signed under the name Ari, generations
of our people grew up believing they were ri not Rupa,
but through a crown process
and labels that impact has been profound.
Still identify today
as ri others feel the identity has
been rewritten or questioned.
Some who affiliate ri feel hurt
that our PSGE carries the name Na you know, as we say,
both hor real, both hold ua, both
ua and much of the pain directed at us as negotiators
has roots in these historic crown imposed processes,
not decisions made lightly.
More recently,
in 2017, the leadership of the Treaty Settlements Committee,
our iwi, made a difficult but necessary decision.
The legislative name would remain namu
and the PSGE would be namu.
Trust beneficiaries could register
as tumu or both.
This compromise was the only pathway
that allowed the settlement to progress.
Without it, we would not be before you today.
Thanks, Jill. Um, I wanna be really clear with the committee
where we are at with the settlement process.
Um, the settlement has been mandated
thoroughly back in 2017.
And I'm gonna go a bit off script here
because I've listened to some of the other.
It was a huge process. We did.
There was months and months of preparation,
getting our EWI role, um, up to speed.
So everyone got the nui.
Uh, we did Hua, iwi and T Makoto
because a lot of our people live out there.
We did Hua Hu Iwi at Marai. We did postal votes.
Um, it was all done,
and there was resounding support for this.
Um, we then initialed the deed at
that time in 2017.
Um, and by no fault of ours, um, the
ANA came up.
So the whole of, um,
collective settlements were put.
Um, they were frozen. There was a delay.
Um, then six years passed
and we heard nothing, nothing from the Crown for six years.
And it has only been recently, um, that we
have sort of been reinvigorated in this process
to get our settlement across the line.
Uh, we've followed the crown process
thoroughly all the way through.
We haven't made the process. It's a crown set process.
We mandated, we did everything that we needed.
We were scrutinized. Um, we put the test by our people.
Um, everyone was invited to come
and vote on our, on our treaty settlement.
And this has happened really quickly.
Um, you know, there may,
I hear complaints about there is lack of consultation,
but it all happened within about two weeks.
Um, funding's always a huge issue as well
with these types of things.
Um, so we went ahead and with two weeks preparation, went
and signed the deed,
which we could have done back in 2017 with the mandate.
Um, so now the deed is ratified and signed
and with what we consider to be overwhelming support.
Um, and yeah, we,
we obviously, the internal issues are internal matters,
and they don't undermine the validity of our settlement,
the mandate of Jill and i's negotiators
or the legitimacy of our PSGE.
So it's time to move forward. Yeah.
So as negotiators, we support this bill.
It allows our iwi to finally begin to rebuild
18 culturally significant sites returned the largest overlay
classification, including our Moga,
financial, Regis and cultural ization funding, the return
of the reversionary interest in TPA domain,
and the ability to plan a future when
can once again stand strong in our,
this bill gives us tools,
but the real restoration will come from
how we carry this COPA moving forward
for the next gen generation, our iwi is moving beyond
the old paradigm of being asset poor
and locked in historic grievance.
We are focused on development and building a future for our
governance today requires capability,
accountability, and vision.
That is a space we have been operating in as PSGE.
And it's time for our iwi to move forward into that future.
Uh, it's a committee. Thank you for hearing us today.
We know the settlement is not perfect, no settlement is,
but it's a foundation.
And after more than a century
of struggle, we are ready to move on.
We welcome your questions.
I don't wanna jump ahead of anyone else.
No, I was looking down the,
Um, if there's no questions, I'll start.
I've got one, but I I You get it first.
Okay. Um, look, thank you very much for, um,
for sharing some explanations.
Um, when you say,
or six years, you didn't hear from the Crown.
Mm-hmm. Um, um,
in 2017 when you signed, um, when you initially signed,
so was there, um, an indication
that they'll get back to you?
And then, um, when you say you didn't hear,
did you initiate any contact in those six years?
So in 2018 when with Ana
happened, um, the conflict, um,
well, the, the, the interest there,
while those were sorted out, um,
we were basically put on ice.
That was it. And so we received no
communication whatsoever from the minister at the time,
nothing for six years.
So we, we just carried on with our lives.
Um, and there, there's a, we are just a little fish
in the hierarchy collector.
We are like one of the little teeny
tiny ones down the bottom.
Um, we don't get a say in what happens
in, in the graver scheme of things.
And so we, we just carried on, floated along.
Just to add to that, um, we were in discussions with Grip,
who was a CC N at the time,
and, um, Ron
through, yeah,
Um, so we were in, in those conversations.
Um, but we had no contact
with the minister, the minister of that time.
I think, just to clarify, we dealt with our,
um, cross claim issues with Ana directly.
They did not oppose, um, our bill
because we went to them without,
and our connections of how we to and with them.
So we didn't have a cross claims, um, combat,
I suppose, with them over.
Yeah. That was settled internally with us as negotiators.
What is the strategy to ensure
that no one else is further left behind
or the margins become so big that it's hard
to identify
going forward?
When you say it's time to move forward,
I don't think your people are ready to not
until we address the white elephant in the room.
I think I just want to, um, comment there.
Every time the Marai trustees have had an
election, I, as the general manager and,
and another for type, have, um,
asked the Maori trustees to meet with us
as the PSGE so that we could come together, Dan
and, um, norm were set, um, to go
to see them each time, and then that got canceled us.
Um, there's obviously written communication,
um, of that, um, you know, that, that communication.
Um, so yeah, I think the p she has reached out
and has tried to work with, with our whanau at the Marai.
Another point to add is when we did our signing,
we invited the chair and the secretary of the Marae.
'cause that was the right thing for us to do,
and they came with us. So
We have
son, the only ones there,
right?
I could
Went through as um,
okay.
Yeah.
All good. Sorry. Sorry, norm. Yeah, that pain in
The area.
Ready to go, go again.
Um, I just had one version changing to completely, um,
just one question I noticed, um,
and I can't find the piece that told me this now,
but that you had purchased a property, um,
and so was that, um, on account in advance?
Uh, or was that from Iwi, um, funds
or, you know, um, I guess capital it was from on account.
Okay. Thank you. I just let, just clarify. Okay, last
Question from Steve.
Um, It feels to me
that there's a mutual acknowledgement
of a frank down relationship there,
and so you would understand why the
buy side feel anxious that with the settlement,
that breakdown could be consolidated rather than repaired
if, um, there's not a healing.
That's a question.
Yeah, I acknowledge that.
And so that we all have a place to go home to.
The internal issues are not new. No.
Um, you know, this, this has been our history
forever from when I was a kid
and my, you know, my, um, uncle was building the, um, Maria
and all that went on with that too.
But what do I wanna say?
I want, we are, I, we are always trying
to provide opportunities to engage with our Maori.
Um, right now they're going through their own issues
with the Maori land court in terms of their recognition
of their trusteeships.
Um, so we will always,
and we always do, we've repeatedly, um, tried to hold
down there like we have, we have to hold our here, we have
to hold this hui here because we got denied
the booking at our marai.
We've gotta move on. We've gotta keep going forward.
We've gotta keep the, you know, doing what we need to do.
Um, the door's always open. It's my marae.
I'm always gonna go home. I'm always gonna work with my au
my au who I grew up with on this ua.
Um, so
absolutely, that's the dream,
Right? Um,
I'm actually deciding we're gonna have a,
a short break now, but
before we do go for that break, I want
to pass, uh, a few comments.
Um, we, we all know
that treaty settlement processes, uh,
are nowhere near perfect.
It is full of compromise, uh, through the processes.
We know it, you know it itself.
Um, and there's these financial red reduces,
cultural redress, apologies, all that sort of stuff
that you expect in a, in, in a, in a settlement process.
But to my mind, uh, there will be
limited success moving forward
without the most important component.
And that is the, uh, the people who are taking it forward.
And it's all of you.
And, uh, clearly, uh, there's, uh,
some communication that needs to be had.
The reason why I wanna hold a break right now is
'cause my experiences, as soon as we finish these hearings,
everybody goes their own ways
and you lose your opportunity to have the cup of tea.
You know what I mean? This cup of tea
in the next 20 minutes could be the most important one
for your future generations, which is
what this should be aimed at.
I ask you to consider that
and see what you can do by potentially the failings
of the communications of the past.
And look at this as a settlement is, is look at this
as a potential new beginning, A new start for you
as a people, all of you, about where you go to,
you got challenges and that don't talk about issues,
talk about solutions together
because it's one thing that's probably outta your control.
It's very likely we're gonna be
passing a settlement bill here.
It is the process that we're gonna be unprecedented.
If we don't do that, it's logical, it will happen.
It's not up to us of what that provides
as an opportunity for you.
It is all of you in the room.
I encourage you to, to go up
to one another and start again.
Have a new beginning, say hello again and,
and begin a new conversation.
Because with brick walls between you, with, with barriers
between you, it is not good
for your future generations around you today.
Think about the future. Don't think about the past, past.
Don't think about what's being, think about what you can be
as a people going forward.
I'm sorry to sound like a bit of a lecturer here,
but I see this as a great opportunity for you.
Great opportunity. Use this as the beginning
of a new beginning for your coordinate,
or that potentially did fail in the
past for whatever reason.
We're not gonna cure that today,
but what we can cure today is how you actually, hopefully,
respectfully, constructively, actually have a cup of tea
and start a new conversation.
I ask you all that. That's what I say. I ask you all that.
So with that, let's, let's have a, at least have a break,
have a cup of tea and we'll reconvene, uh,
to maybe it's say, uh, 10, uh, 1135.
Does that sound about right?
I what time?
You gimme a suggestion.
Uh, 1115.
1115 ka Okay.
Yeah.